uttānapādanṛpatermanunandanasya
jāyā babhūva surucirnitarāmabhīṣṭā |
anyā sunītiriti bharturanādṛtā sā
tvāmeva nityamagati: śaraṇaṃ gatā'bhūt ||1||
uttānapāda-nṛpate:-	king Uttaanpaad's
manu-nandanasya	who was the son of Manu
jāyā babhūva suruci:-	wife became Suruchi
nitarām-abhīṣṭā	extremely dear
anyā sunīti:-iti	the other (wife) named Suneeti
bhartu:-anādṛtā sā	she was neglected by her husband
tvām-eva nityam-	in Thee alone, who are eternal
agati:-śaraṇaṃ	refuge of the helpless (she)
gatā-abhūt	(in Thee) took refuge
To the king Uttaanpaada, the son of Manu, his wife Suruchi was extremely dear. The other wife Suneeti being ignored by her husband, was helpless and took shelter in Thee alone who are eternal refuge of the helpless.
aṅke pitu: suruciputrakamuttamaṃ taṃ
dṛṣṭvā dhruva: kila sunītisuto'dhirokṣyan |
ācikṣipe kila śiśu: sutarāṃ surucyā
dussantyajā khalu bhavadvimukhairasūyā ||2||
aṅke pitu:	on (his) father's lap
suruci-putrakam-uttamaṃ taṃ	Suruchi's son, that Uttama,
dṛṣṭvā dhruva: kila	seeing Dhruva indeed
sunīti-suta:-adhirokṣyan	the son of Suneeti (who was) about to get up,
ācikṣipe kila śiśu:	the child was severely scolded
sutarāṃ surucyā	as a result by Suruchi
dussantyajā khalu	indeed (jealousy) cannot be given up
bhavat-vimukhai:-	by those who are not devoted to Thee
asūyā	jealousy
Seeing Uttama, Suruchi's son, seated on his father's lap, Suneeti's son Dhruva also tried to get up. But as a result, the child was severely scolded by Suruchi. Indeed, jealousy cannot be given up, by those who are not devoted to Thee.
tvanmohite pitari paśyati dāravaśye
dūraṃ duruktinihata: sa gato nijāmbām |
sā'pi svakarmagatisantaraṇāya puṃsāṃ
tvatpādameva śaraṇaṃ śiśave śaśaṃsa ||3||
tvat-mohite pitari	being under the influence of Thy Maayaa, the father
paśyati dār-vaśye	seeing hen-pecked
dūraṃ durukti-nihata: sa:	he (Dhruva) was taken aback and hurt by the cruel words
gata: nija-ambām	(he) went to his own mother
sā-api	she also
sva-karma-gati-santaraṇāya	for getting over the effects of ones own actions
puṃsāṃ	for human beings
tvat-pādam-eva śaraṇaṃ	Thy feet are the only refuge
śiśave śaśaṃsa	(thus) she advised the child
The hen-pecked king who was under the influence of Thy Maayaa, silently looked on as Dhruva was scolded by Suruchi. Hurt for being scolded, Dhruva then went to his own mother Suneeti who advised him that the only way to overcome the evils of ones own past actions is to seek shelter at Thy feet.
ākarṇya so'pi bhavadarcananiścitātmā
mānī niretya nagarāt kila pañcavarṣa: |
sandṛṣṭanāradaniveditamantramārga-
stvāmārarādha tapasā madhukānanānte ||4||
ākarṇya sa:-api	hearing, he also
bhavat-arcana-niścita-ātmā	determined to devote himself to Thy worship
mānī niretya nagarāt	he who had self respect, leaving the town
kila pañca-varṣa:	(though) indeed five years of age
sandṛṣṭa-nārada	meeting Naarada,
nivedita-mantra-mārga:-	and receiving instructions in the path of Mantra (japa)
tvām-ārarādha tapasā	propitiated Thee by penance
madhu-kānana-ante	at the end of the forest named Madhu
The self respecting Dhruva, who was only five years of age, hearing his mother's words, became determined to worship Thee, and so left the town. In the forest of Madhuvana, he propitiated Thee by penance, following the method of Mantra japa and the Mantra given to him by Naarada, whom he had met on the way.
tāte viṣaṇṇahṛdaye nagarīṃ gatena
śrīnāradena parisāntvitacittavṛttau |
bālastvadarpitamanā: kramavardhitena
ninye kaṭhoratapasā kila pañcamāsān ||5||
tāte viṣaṇṇa-hṛdaye	while the father was full of remorse,
nagarīṃ gatena śrīnāradena	by Shri Naarada, who had gone to the town
parisāntvita-citta-vṛtau	(his) upset mind was consoled
bāla:-tvat-arpita-manā:	(meanwhile) the boy with his mind fixed on Thee
krama-vardhitena	with increasing
ninye kaṭhora-tapasā	intensity carried out severe penance
kila pañca-māsān	indeed for five months
The king who was full of remorse, was pacified and consoled by Naarada who had gone to the town. Dhruva, the boy with his mind fixed on Thee, spent five months in severe penance, with increasing intensity.
tāvattapobalanirucch-vasite digante
devārthitastvamudayatkaruṇārdracetā: |
tvadrūpacidrasanilīnamate: purastā-
dāvirbabhūvitha vibho garuḍādhirūḍha: ||6||
tāvat-tapo-bala-nirucch-vasite	then,suffocated by the power of penance (of Dhruva)
digante	all the directions
deva-arthita:-tvam-	to the devas who were seeking relief, (to them) Thou
udayat-karuṇā-ārdra-cetā:	with a mind surging with compassion
tvat-rūpa-cit-rasa-nilīna-mate:	(Dhruva) whose mind was absorbed with the Supreme Consciousness Bliss, which had assumed Thy form
purastāt-	in front ( of Dhruva)
āvirbabhūvitha	(Thou) appeared
vibho	O Lord!
garuḍa-adhirūḍha:	mounted on Garuda
Then, when all around in all the directions there was suffocation by the power of Dhruva's penance, the devas were seeking relief. Then, Thou surging with compassion, appeared seated on Garuda, in front of Dhruva, whose mind was absorbed in contemplation of the Supreme Consciousness Bliss which had assumed Thy form.
tvaddarśanapramadabhārataraṅgitaṃ taṃ
dṛgbhyāṃ nimagnamiva rūparasāyane te |
tuṣṭūṣamāṇamavagamya kapoladeśe
saṃspṛṣṭavānasi dareṇa tathā''dareṇa ||7||
tvat-darśana	at the sight of Thee
pramada-bhāra-taraṅgitaṃ taṃ	which completely overwhelmed him with waves of Bliss and ecstasy
dṛgbhyām nimagnam-iva	as if his eyes were submerged
rūpa-rasāyane te	in the nectar of Thy entrancing form
tuṣṭūṣamāṇam-	desirous of singing Thy praise
avagamya	understanding (Thou)
kapola-deśe	on the cheek
saṃspṛṣṭavān-asi	Thou did touch (him)
dareṇa	by the conch
tathā-ādareṇa	and with great affection
At Thy divine sight, Dhruva was completely overwhelmed and was full of the the waves of Bliss and ecstasy. As his eyes were submerged in the nectar of Thy entrancing form he was desirous of singing Thy praise. Realising his incapability of finding words, Thou with great affection touched his cheek with the conch.
tāvadvibodhavimalaṃ praṇuvantamena-
mābhāṣathāstvamavagamya tadīyabhāvam |
rājyaṃ ciraṃ samanubhūya bhajasva bhūya:
sarvottaraṃ dhruva padaṃ vinivṛttihīnam ||8||
tāvat-	then
vibodha-vimalaṃ	who had been cleansed of all taint by knowledge
praṇuvantam-enam-	who was profusely praising Thee
abhāṣathā:-tvam-	Thou did tell (him)
avagamya tadīya-bhāvam	knowing what he had in mind
rājyaṃ ciraṃ samanubhūya	(that) after enjoying kingship for long
bhajasva bhūya:	attain, thereafter,
sarvottaraṃ dhruva padaṃ	the loftiest of status of Dhruva
vinivṛtti-hīnaṃ	from which there is no return
He then sang Thy praise profusely, having been purified and enlightened by pure knowledge. Knowing what he had in mind, Thou blessed him to enjoy the kingdom for long and then attain the loftiest of states, that of Dhruva, from where there is no return to lower states.
ityūciṣi tvayi gate nṛpanandano'sā-
vānanditākhilajano nagarīmupeta: |
reme ciraṃ bhavadanugrahapūrṇakāma-
stāte gate ca vanamādṛtarājyabhāra: ||9||
iti-ūciṣi	having said so
tvayi gate	when Thou had gone away
nṛpanandana:-asau-	this prince
ānandita-akhila-jana:	pleasing all the people
nagarīm-upeta:	reached the town
reme ciraṃ	enjoyed for a long time
bhavat-anugraha-pūrṇa-kāma:-	with all his aspirations fulfilled by Thy grace
tāte gate ca vanam-	and when his father had gone to the forest
ādṛta-rājya-bhāra:	taking over the administration of the kingdom
When Thou disappeared after having said so, this prince Dhruva came back to town delighting all people. When his father had gone to the forest, taking over the administration of the kingdom, with all his aspirations fulfilled by Thy grace, he lived happily for a long time.
yakṣeṇa deva nihate punaruttame'smin
yakṣai: sa yuddhanirato virato manūktyā |
śāntyā prasannahṛdayāddhanadādupetā-
ttvadbhaktimeva sudṛḍhāmavṛṇonmahātmā ||10||
yakṣeṇa	by Yaksha
deva	O Lord!
nihate puna:-	being killed, then
uttame-asmin	this Uttama (Dhruva's brother)
yakṣai: sa yuddha-nirata:	he engaged in a fight with the Yakshas
virata: manu-uktyā	and withdrew on Manu's advice
śāntyā prasanna-hṛdayāt-	who was happy at the peaceful nature (of Dhruva)
dhanadāt-upetāt	from Kuber who had approached him (Dhruva)
tvat-bhaktim-eva sudṛḍhām-	Thy firm devotion alone
avṛṇot-	asked for as a boon
mahātmā	the great souled one (Dhruva)
When Uttama, Dhruva's brother was killed by Yaksha, Dhruva battled with Yaksha, but withdrew on Manu's advice. Pleased with Dhruva's peaceful nature, Kuber came and offered him a boon, but the great soul asked only for firm devotion to Thee.
ante bhavatpuruṣanītavimānayāto
mātrā samaṃ dhruvapade mudito'yamāste |
evaṃ svabhṛtyajanapālanaloladhīstvaṃ
vātālayādhipa nirundhi mamāmayaughān ||11||
ante	finally
bhavat-puruṣa-nīta-vimāna-yāta:	going in the celestial car brought by Thy attendants
mātrā samaṃ	along with his mother
dhruvapade mudita:-ayam-āste	(he) is living happily even now in Dhruvaloka
evaṃ	in this manner
sva-bhṛtya-jana-pālana-lola-dhī:-tvaṃ	Thou who are ever eager minded to protect Thy devotees
vātālayādhipa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
nirundhi	cure
mama-āmaya-aughān	my hoards of ailments
Finally, leaving along with his mother in the celestial car brought by Thy attendants, he is even now living happily in Dhruvaloka. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who are ever intent on protecting Thy devotees, cure my hoards of ailments.